You might have to come up.
Chin it camera. We going drop him too.
He's next. Yeah. You the main meal. He
With a On can raise the first.
Hello. All right. Good morning.
Thank you very much for being along here with us today.
Uh, we have 30 minutes set down for the briefing in relation
to the International Treaty Agreement on climate change,
trade and sustainability.
Um, we'll just say
that it is normal practice in the committee
that we would receive a written briefing
before hearing, uh, from you on this.
And so we are disappointed that we don't have that to refer
to in this instance.
Um, but we obviously will hand over to you for
your verbal briefing and then questions.
My apologies for that. Um,
and we can certainly provide a, uh,
a written briefing, uh, as well.
Sure. Including in terms of the National Impact Assessment,
which received also.
Okay. Over to you. So
Chair, thank you very much. And again,
I do apologize for that.
Um, on the, the written piece, um, just to
Give you a short introduction to, um, this agreement.
So what I talk about is briefly some of the its origins,
but explain what the concept is
because this is a, a small membership agreement.
It's only for, but it is something
that we call an open PLU lateral agreement,
and it's designed to expand over time.
And I wanna explain a little bit about
experience working on that.
And then very specifically,
I wanna speak about the agreement in three parts.
One, the classical Orthodox trade response to,
uh, environmental questions.
So environmental goods and services.
Uh, then I wanna talk about the, um,
fossil fuel subsidy disciplines
and the eco labeling elements.
And then, um, conclude in, which is a,
perhaps the first question is why do this agreement?
And there's three reasons. Uh, the first is, um,
New Zealand has a long history of trying to
take out distortions in the international trading system.
Agricultural subsidies are the classical piece
that we've been working on for as long as I can remember,
and more than 50 years of work in the World Trade
Organization on, uh, on that.
Um, ag and agricultural fishery subsidies have been our
primary focus, uh, but we have now expanded
because we do see these new distortions in the system.
And that brings me to the second part, which is
what are these distortions?
They're distortions in terms of the advantage
that our competitors have, um,
because they are able, um,
to produce products at a lower price
because they're being subsidized by their governments
through the inputs
that they get from the fossil fuel subsidies,
whether it's a production subsidy or a consumption subsidy.
Either way, these are a very significant, uh,
distortion into the system
and certainly does not, uh, help us in terms
of the competitiveness that we feel out there.
So lowest prices lowers, uh, returns
to New Zealand exporters,
not just agriculture, but across the board.
The third reason is, um, a strong view on our side that, uh,
trade is one of the tools
that we can address climate change.
It's not silver bullet, but certainly, uh, trade
and trade agreements need to be able to make a contribution.
And that's one of the, uh,
primary reasons why we wanted to do this.
The second thing I wanted to say was, um, in terms
of the history of this agreement, it has a long origin.
Uh, and from my side, as an official, one
of the positive things has been the strong bipartisan
support for this initiative.
Uh, the, the origins, of course,
for this were something called the Friends
of Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform Group.
Uh, this was established in 2010.
Uh, the original membership was just New Zealand and Sweden.
Uh, in 2000
and, um, 15, um, prime Minister Key launched the Friends
of fossil fuel subsidy, communique at the, um,
at the cop at the Climate Change Conference.
And at the same time, in 2017 through until 2024, uh,
we launched a joint ministerial statement at the World
Trade Organization as well.
So we looked to do climate change,
and we looked to do the trade piece together.
And the work in the World Trade Organization has expanded
from 12 members that worked on it way back in 2017.
It expanded to 47, uh, this year, uh, in, uh,
2024 in Abu Dhabi.
So gradual incremental progress of, of support.
This negotiation itself was launched in September, 2019.
Uh, it was concluded in July, 2024.
Uh, and the signature was in the,
was virtual signature appropriately
for an agreement on climate change, no travel, and so on.
Um, mm-hmm. So it was signed
virtually on the 15th of November.
So just a few, uh, short weeks ago.
It will enter into force when three of the four of us, uh,
the four being New Zealand, uh, Iceland, Switzerland,
and Costa Rica, when three of us have brought the agreement,
uh, through our parliamentary processes and ratified it.
That then brings me to this
concept of open, plural lateralism.
So this is a, an agreement
that's deliberately designed not to be a closed agreement.
It's supposed to expand over time.
And we've got a long history of working
as New Zealand on these kinds of agreements.
We didn't use to call 'em open PLU lateral
agreements, but that is what they are.
The classical, uh,
and perhaps the most famous example is the P four agreement.
Uh, that was Singapore, New Zealand, Bruni and Chile.
I can remember, uh, appearing, uh, alongside in the way,
sorry, I should have introduced my colleague,
Rebecca Stephen Smith, who runs the unit that is, um,
implementing, uh, this important agreement.
I was in Rebecca's, uh, position, uh,
many years ago when we presented the P four agreement
to this committee.
Uh, and it was pointed out that it had cost more
to negotiate the agreement than the benefits of P four.
Uh, and I can remember David Walker,
who was the chief negotiator at the time, explaining
what the vision was, that over time this would expand.
There was plenty of skepticism, it's fair to say.
Um, and a sort
of a real questioning about what this approach was.
Well, P four, uh, is a really good example of
what we did signed in 2005.
Uh, it then emerged into, um, the TPP,
the Transpacific Partnership Agreement in 2015.
So 12 countries from four
to 12 brought in the United States, brought in Japan,
Canada, Mexico, and others.
It then became C-P-T-V-P.
Sadly, the United States withdrew, uh, president Trump.
Uh, and that agreement, CPTP, really important to us, uh,
has, was entered into force, uh, in 2018.
So it took 12 years for us
to move from this very small agreement with a number
of small countries, but a high quality, uh, agreement
and the commitment that numerous governments, uh, show
to this agreement over time, eventually emerged into, um,
what we have today in terms of the CPTP.
Another example of the, this approach
that we've adopted is the
Digitally Economy Partnership Agreement.
Again, three small countries, Singapore
and New Zealand, Chile devising rules, uh, trying
to make sure that the rules would work
for us in a digital space,
and then making it open to anyone
who could meet the standards, uh, of the agreement.
This one has worked much more quickly than, um, uh,
the P four because within a year of the agreement,
we got an application from a G 20 country, uh, Korea,
which is now a full member.
The group of countries looking
to join the Digital Economy Punch Agreement is now six,
includes China, Canada, so G seven Economy, El Salvador,
Ukraine, uh, United Arab Emirates, and Peru.
Global Trade in general Agreement is another good example.
Just three original members, New Zealand, Chile, and Canada.
Uh, it's now got 10 members.
So this idea of open, plural, lateralism really does work.
And the agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability is, uh, exactly about, uh,
an agreement that we've created the four of us,
but that we want others to join
because that is where we're going
to have the most value from it.
Mm-hmm. So to turn to the three elements
of the agreement itself, the first is, um,
on environmental goods and services.
This is, as I said at the start,
this is the classical trade response to a climate problem.
You lower barriers, uh, you therefore lower the price, and
therefore you hope that your consumers
and producers will use those environmental technologies
and improve environmental outcomes, save money, uh,
but also, um, uh, help improve, uh, the environment.
But it is the classical trade response.
The same on environmental services.
You make commitments on environmental services
and services related to environmental protection.
And again, you lower the price of these
and you hope that people will take them up
because they are now cheaper, uh, than other, um, uh,
elements, uh, that you might use to manage this.
So, environmental goods, um, it seems like an obvious thing.
Um, but actually we have not been
successful internationally.
We have not been successful at the World Trade Organization
either to get a list of environmental goods, even to agree
how to define an environmental good.
The only example that we have out there is the 54 items
established in 2012 by apec, uh,
where there was an agreement on 54 items.
Uh, what we have,
or what you have in front of you today in,
in your examination processes 316 items
at the six digit level.
So, in fact, there are many more,
but it's 316 at, at that heading.
Things like solar panels, wind turbines,
air quality monitors, installation material, and so on.
So, classical elements of how you'd try to respond
to some environmental challenges out there,
perhaps significantly too.
What we've also done in this is we haven't just said, here's
what we agree as an environmental good.
We've actually explained why we think it's environmental
good, and that's the first time that's actually been
done internationally.
Importantly, too, uh, for New Zealand, uh, we have
for the first time included
and had defined
as an environmental good wood products and wool.
So two very significant items for us.
Uh, I was part of the Environmental Goods Agreement, uh,
process in apec,
and also a failed attempt at the World Trade Organization
to get an agreement and would,
and wool proved to be the most challenging items for some
of our colleagues to agree.
So what this agreement now does, it says wood
and wool are agreed, uh, as an environmental good.
And that is a really important advantage for us
as we look out to expand this agreement into the future.
Perhaps the third element, uh,
of the environmental goods piece is that, uh,
and this is part of the dynamic piece of this,
this is a, a living list.
So this list of 316 items can be regularly updated.
Uh, and the idea is that we will keep up
with emerging, uh, technology.
So to give you a really good example of something
that is not covered in the agreement,
because the harmonized system,
the customs tariff system has not been able
to keep up, is green hydrogen.
So we are not able to include that
because the, the system itself is not established in terms
of what the tariff would look like.
So the living list becomes very important if you think
about, uh, green hydrogen.
But also, if you think about all the critical minerals
that we need for the energy transition that's ahead of us,
getting them on this living list, uh,
is a really important dimension.
So the four of us certainly look
to make sure this is a dynamic process.
Environmental services, um, again,
little bit like environmental goods.
We've never had a proper definition
or a legally binding definition of
what an environmental service is.
So this gives us, for the first time an
expansive definition.
And it's really important because, uh,
the environmental services that we classically have thought
of were established in 9 95.
The environment and the challenges we face,
and the technologies and the way in which we service those,
and the way in which we deliver them,
including in the services space,
have significantly changed since 9 95.
So what's called the CPC Code system, uh,
a UN classification system that we use to schedule services
is essentially, well out of date.
What this agreement does it for the first time establishes
what is an environmental service.
And it associates that with not just an environmental good,
but also things like carbon markets.
So things we could not have envisaged at the end
of the Uruguay round in 9 95.
We are now picking up through this process.
And I should note that part of the origin
of the environmental services list
that we've agreed here comes out of apec, uh, out
of the APEC host year, uh, that New Zealand led, uh,
on acknowledge, um, honorable O'Connor, um, for, uh,
the work that was done through the Trade Minister's
dialogue, which helped establish, uh, those services.
That was an agreed list, uh, through apec.
Um, maybe now to turn to the fossil fuel subsidies chapter.
Uh, which in many ways was the most challenging
part of the negotiation.
Just to contextualize what we're trying to do here.
So the sums being spent internationally,
$1.6 trillion 2022.
So the OECD tells us $1.6 trillion
of taxpayer money spent on fossil fuel subsidization
for the first time in 2008, 2009, G 20 liter APEC leaders,
uh, and G seven leaders said,
we wanna reform fossil fuel subsidies.
Back then, less than half a trillion dollars was being spent
on fossil fuel subsidies.
Every year since then, APEC leaders, G 20 liters,
G seven liters, have been saying, we wanna reform.
There has been no reform.
And actually there's been an escalation
of fossil fuel subsidization.
So from less than half a trillion, we're now $1.6 trillion.
The elimination, uh,
of fossil fuel subsidies would be according to the IPCC.
If you remove fossil fuel subsidies,
that would be the equivalent of a 10% cut for the, uh, level
that we need to get to, uh, one point, uh, 5% by 2030.
To put that in context, we actually need a 43%
to achieve the 1.5.
So 10% is a very significant component of that.
The eus Joint Research Committee, which is their, uh,
joint Research Commission, which is their premier science
and innovation, uh, grouping estimates, uh, last year,
that if we could eliminate phos fuel subsidies,
that's the equivalent of 165 countries stopping their
elimination, uh, their emissions immediately.
So this is a very significant, uh,
thing that we're trying to do.
And of course, it only works if other countries then make
good on the commitment they make at these summits
and say, right, how are we gonna reform that?
What we're trying to say in this agreement is,
the way we have meaningfully reformed subsidies
internationally on other subjects like
agriculture, is through trade rules.
It is through trade rules,
because they're legally enforceable
that we actually make real difference.
So the friends of fossil fuel subsidies was designed
to lobby the G 20 leaders, the G seven leaders
and APEC leaders, to say, how are you gonna do this reform?
And we, as a small group of countries, a group
of small countries wanted to help 'em in that reform.
'cause of course, we are not actually, the significant
problem here out of
that has emerged the agreement on
climate change, trade and sustainability.
Essentially, we said in the end, we can't wait around
for the big guys anymore.
We are gonna design an agreement that is going
to address these subsidies.
And then we're gonna ask the G 20, the G seven,
and the APEC leaders, you've been saying you wanna do
reform, tell us why you can't be part of this agreement,
which actually would make it legally enforceable.
And so that is the, the genesis
of this chapter in this agreement.
Now, the elements of the agreement itself, uh,
it's the first time we've got a legally, uh,
binding in a trade agreement definition of
what is a fossil subsidy.
That's very significant indeed.
'cause it gives us a real meaningful starting point.
The reference point for that work is of course,
the WTO agreement on subsidies and Counter Valley measures.
And that is the reference point, which we've now expanded
to make sure that you could take into account not just the
trade effects, but the environmental effects as well.
That, again, is groundbreaking.
In the, in the agreement, we have three types of subsidies.
One is production of fossil fuels, the consumption
of fossil fuels, and, um, the production
of fossil fuel energy products.
So those three areas are, uh,
the areas of focus for the chapter.
Uh, three big things that we did.
The first is we've prohibited, in other words,
stopped subsidies to coal
and other fossil fuels with comparable emissions.
The second is, there's a standstill commitment by all of us,
and any new member would also be obliged to do that,
no new subsidies to the fossil fuel, uh, sector.
And the third is that you've gotta schedule any subsidy.
So it is the case that all of us, uh,
in this agreement do have some subsidies
to the fossil fuel industry.
Uh, we had to schedule those.
There has to be some transparency around those,
and those are subject to periodic reviews.
Now, at the same time, of course, there are exceptions, uh,
that we've agreed,
and there are essentially eight
exceptions to this agreement.
You can continue to use them if subsidies,
if you are using them to decommission, uh,
and get out of the fossil fuels things.
You can use subsidization to assist.
Uh, you can use subsidies if they are explicitly designed
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
through your transition period.
The third one is you can support low income,
vulnerable populations.
Uh, and this is a very important dimension for the Pacific,
who of course, do subsidize fossil fuel, uh, use in
to move food and other products in
between the islands themselves.
So that is a recognition of that.
There has to be some transparency
around the scheduling of that.
But nevertheless, it's a really important, uh, element
that recognizes this is not a straightforward, uh, piece
of reform that people do.
Sorry, rather than running through the rest
of them, I'm just conscious of time.
Um, we might jump to the questions if, if you
Have, can I do the eco labeling one?
Sure. Just very quickly, and then, and I really am done.
So on eco labeling, that's the third pillar of the, uh,
agreement I mentioned in, uh, my presentation to the, uh,
committee, I think last week.
Um, one of the challenges that we face internationally is
that the way in which, uh, the rise
of protectionism is happening is also using environmental,
uh, reasons to try to block access.
So the WTOs estimated that in 2018,
there were less than a thousand new environment measures
that affected trade in 2023, that increased
to 3,200 new measures that affected trade that were driven
by an environmental reason.
So what this, uh, chapter does, it sets out some guidelines
about truthfulness, about making sure the consumer does have
the right to know about what the product that they have.
It's also designed to test the environmental
effectiveness of the products.
Those guidelines, we are all committed to, um, uh,
to promote and to share,
particularly with the private sector.
So one of the emerging challenges that I talked about, uh,
last week is the monopsony effects of supermarkets.
So the ability of these buyers of products, uh,
to prevent access to supermarket shelves
unless you are able to meet certain specific standards.
And I use the example of Stonewall maintenance programs
as an example of a a one size fits all
that works perfectly in the particular market that did that,
but has no relevance in the New Zealand context.
What the eco labeling chapter does is it provides some
measure of discipline that governments are obliged
to promote the guidelines,
but also are obliged to respond to questions.
If we see that in Iceland or Switzerland
or Costa Rica, there is a new private company
that's put into place a label
that we think is discriminatory or is unfair, uh,
or has unclear environmental benefits, we are able to ask
that government, that government then asks, um, the, uh,
the private sector firm,
and then there's a reporting process.
It goes to the point that I also tried
to make last week about the, the Dracula effect.
So getting transparency, getting sunlight on these things,
and hopefully that's the way in which you deal with, uh,
reducing that form of protectionism, because
That's the only mechanism, isn't it?
Sorry, The voluntary system though, isn't it?
And so the sunlight aspect will be the only way of trying to
It is, but I would argue that if you are a,
a serious country and you are participating in an agreement
like this, that you would take that responsibility serious
that this is part of international treaty. Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Um,
I'm just interested if you could give us some insight
around, um, the likelihood of
new entrance, what signals you might have
seen in that regard.
It's great to see some ambitious, um,
aspects of the agreement.
Uh, but I guess the question then is, if,
if they're too ambitious, is that potentially putting off
countries that might have signed up
to something slightly less ambitious?
Uh, and would some progress be better than total progress,
as it were in the sense of this, um, specifically
with relation to Fiji
and Norway, who are both initially involved
but have not signed up to this?
I'm interested in why that is.
So yes, it is a fine balance strike between ambition
that makes a difference and, uh, reflects some
of the actual realities on the ground.
So part of it was some of those exceptions that I was, uh,
walking through to try to recognize those conditions.
And that was, you know, certainly one of the areas
for Pacific Island countries is needing to know
that they would be able to continue that support.
Uh, but that they would have to also
be transparent about it.
I think the other element, um, is
that in the environmental goods, um, chapter,
there are a number of exceptions.
You can take a holiday, quote unquote, on certain forms
of certain tariff eliminations.
So you need to commit to the list,
but you can then, uh, prevent and limit some of those.
I mean, I'd have a question as to why you'd wanna do that,
but anyway, there are good reasons why people might want
to hold a tariff, whether it's protected domestic industry
or indeed, um, because of over capacity, uh, questions.
But there, so there are elements in each of the chapters
that are designed to respond to the kind of the reality
of trying to bring, um, countries in.
Um, yes, Fiji had been a participant,
but, um, moved out of it
because it has limited negotiating resources
to the explanation we were given.
Um, and they focused on the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework
Agreement, uh, which was being negotiated in, in parallel.
Uh, the other element, um, so we,
we are obviously interested in talking to the G seven
and the G 20 countries who
annually say they wanna make this reform.
Uh, and we wanna ask them,
can you tell us why you can't be part of this?
Yeah. Um, so, and,
and then we want to have a discussion about them.
You know, what, what is holding you back?
Uh, what is it that we've missed in this agreement
that you would need, uh, in there?
So you think about the uk, the eu, Canada, Korea,
uh, and others like that.
Then of course, you've got developing countries,
a whole suite of them, uh, Columbia, Ecuador,
the African countries, the Pacific Island states.
There is a, a a, a distinct difference
between the way in which they would all view this agreement.
Some will have to make commitments that will really
require them to make change, stop subsidization,
for example, eliminate tariffs.
Um, but for others, uh, the power will be,
here's a trade agreement that helps us contribute
to dealing with climate change.
Good. Uh,
Dr. Lawrence, Nan. Oh,
Um, Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You've touched on this sort of briefly, particularly
around the, I guess, the goal
around the fossil fuel subsidy,
but I guess my question is kinda overall,
what is the binding nature of this agreement?
So this is a binding agreement, so it has the possibility
of applying trade sanctions if someone, uh, renes on
or does not fulfill the commitments
and obligations in the agreement.
So it is a, in that sense, it's a classical trade agreement.
Okay.
Honorable Damien, Look, thank you very much.
And I, I think the complexity of this kind of, um,
gives weight to the argument that probably an oral,
um, briefing is, is useful.
And hopefully we could keep updating this.
Uh, just on one technical issue, we, um, we're going
to renew, the government's gonna renew, um, uh, drilling
for gas, and there has been a request by the industry
to guarantee that.
Would that be considered a subsidy under the fossil fuel
subsidies arrangements internationally?
So, so we would need to see the, the specifics of this,
but if it's part of the transition piece,
then certainly there's a carefully drafted exception
that would manage, um, that possibility.
So again, we, we'd be wanting to work with,
and we already do, uh, as part of the inter-agency process
with MB in particular, um, on how this, uh,
these, these will be managed.
We, we are confident that there are, to go
to your point about the re the real world dimension of this,
um, that there are practical ways to manage that.
Um, but it's not a, it's not a blank check.
Were there any key environmental goods from the
New Zealand perspective that didn't get across the line?
So from, I know, I would say that, uh, no.
Um, look, our big priority was a, a credible list so
that when people looked at it, uh, which is why the,
the descriptions of each product
and why it's an environment
of good becomes really important,
and that's actually codified in the agreement itself.
So for us, it was about the credibility of the list,
that people didn't look at it and think, why is that there?
Uh, that clearly responds to someone's commercial interest.
It's not an environmental product.
So that's one element, the credibility.
And the second was we do firmly believe that wool, uh,
as insulation as a way of managing oil spills, uh,
and wood, uh, sustainable products, uh,
that make a difference, uh, on the environment.
And that has been a, a strong position
of the New Zealand government of both sides of,
uh, of parliament on that.
So I don't believe that we missed anything
unless you could think of anything off the top of your
Head. Uh, the only
thing I would say is,
and some of the codes are a wee bit old, so I think we
registered that there were, were things that if the,
when the codes are updated, we'd like to see that list
Such as Green, green, hydrogen hydrogen's,
the one we were referring to.
Yeah. So green hydrogen is definitely one,
and then there's the critical minerals piece.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so as that, as our understanding of the role
that critical minerals play in the energy transition.
Uh, so a lot of those critical minerals are vital
for hybrid batteries and so on,
and the way in which that helps in the transition,
picking those up in the, uh,
in the agreement will be really important.
That's why the living list concept
that New Zealand pioneered in the World Trade Organization
and brought into this agreement is so important.
That's, that's how you keep this agreement relevant in a
normal, sorry, quote unquote, a normal trade agreement.
You'd have a review period between five and seven years.
That's what you normally do. This living list thing
is a really dynamic one. Mm-hmm.
Good. Daniel Kirkpatrick,
Uh, thank you. Um,
I was just interested to understand a, if any, uh,
disadvantages to New Zealand, uh, from this agreement,
because we should always, you know, think about that
as well, um, particularly in cost wise or in, um, in trade.
So it, it, it's a good question.
Um, yes, it depends a little bit on your perspective.
Um, so yes, some would argue that, uh, one
of the disadvantages that we eliminate this tariff,
the tariffs on environment of goods to everybody, uh,
and that we therefore lose a modest amount of revenue, uh,
from the, from the tariffs themselves.
Of course, that's offset by the benefit
to New Zealand producers
of having cheaper product, uh, in New Zealand.
And also I'd say that that's also consistent
with international rules, be international trade rules,
because it is not possible to do an agreement like this, um,
and keep it in accordance with, uh, wt O rules
unless you make the commitment to all partners, uh,
that you're gonna share the benefits of the agreement
because there's something called, um,
substantially all trade.
So for a trade agreement to be consistent
with the WTO O rules, it needs
to cover substantially all trade.
If it does not, and this does not cover substantially all
trade, you know, it doesn't include
manufacture all manufactured products.
It doesn't include all agricultural products, for example.
So because of that, the four of us who are big supporters
of the rules-based trading system said,
we're gonna MFN that commitment.
In other words, we're gonna
make that commitment to everybody.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and of course, I would argue, um,
and in any case, most of our tariffs are at zero
or uh, less than five.
There are some exceptions.
Um, but again, the benefit of the removal in these cases,
in terms of the environmental, uh, benefit
and the uptake, uh, are significant.
And I guess also there'd be, um, the argument that, um,
binding ourselves in on fossil fuel subsidies might, uh,
might cause some people some anxiety.
Again, it's about transparency, it's about scheduling.
And I would say that we're also part
of the APEC leaders' commitment, uh, that it's been saying
for many years that we need to, to do this.
And again, that disadvantage versus the advantage
that New Zealand exporters are going to get,
because you start to level that playing field
and the better return
that New Zealand exporters are gonna get once others
lose their subsidies.
And the competitiveness, the positive competitiveness
effects for us, I think significantly outweigh the, um,
the perceived disadvantage. Great. Thank you.
What's your estimate of the timeframe it would take for
that cost benefit to be in our favor?
So, I, I would say this,
but I, I believe already that benefit is, uh, in our favor
because we've got this new access
to at least three partners.
Switzerland is a not insignificant,
uh, partner in this space.
Um, I think that my standard, uh,
line on open PLE laterals has always been to look at P four
and say, look, it's gonna take you between 10 and 15 years
before you really get to something I was wrong in the
digital economy partnership agreement.
I did not expect that we would
so quickly attract a G 20 partner, but that is the case.
So I can't use my, my hard
and fast rule, uh, which goes back to, uh, my former boss,
David Walker, who predicted that it would take 20
to 25 years before we actually picked up enough people.
I wound that back to 15.
Uh, but the digital economy partnership agreement proved me
wrong and the global trans gender arrangement, uh,
significantly proved me wrong.
So, um, Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I kind of wanted to know
how does this agreement stack up with some of the other, uh,
sort of comparable agreement,
and I think I'm thinking of the positive climate trade
agenda for development done
by the UN Conference on Trade and Development.
So what is this agreement doing in terms of some
of the things like reducing patent protection,
ongoing technology building technic, um, you know, something
that African groups as other have advocated.
So building, uh, technical capacity,
providing incentives on zero tariff regime
for plastic substitutes to give an example,
and adequate policy and fiscal space
for developing countries.
So there are other things at play, which seems
to be more progressive
and more visionary than this one.
So how does this stack come?
Okay. I have to say respectfully that I disagree with that
because, um, those agreements are not trade agreements.
Uh, the value of what you get here is a trade agreement
that is enforceable.
Uh, so the application of, um,
the dispute settlement mechanism that we have
through the agreement is something
that those other agreements that you mentioned do not
have those other agreements.
Also, the commitments there are not, uh, of the same, uh,
enforceable type that's here.
They are important agreements,
and they are, I would argue they're all complimentary,
but this agreement is the first one
that establishes actual disciplines on
fossil fuel subsidies.
That is not the case with the ones
that you've, um, described.
Alright, Thank you.
We are gonna have to wrap it up there.
Unfortunately, we are over it on time,
but appreciate you coming in.
Um, I getting the agreement across the line
and it'll be scrutinizing it over the next month or so.
Thank you. Thank you.
Our members will stay in public session for our next
hearing, which actually needs our ongoing work on the non
tariff barriers briefing,
and we have my name McGregor from
here to give us some insights around the impact
of non tariff barriers on Maori exporters.
Um, so thank you very much for that chair.
And I acknowledge our, um, Tasman, um, MP for many years.
Dam O'Connor has been, um, uh, somebody that,
that our organization's engaged with.
I'm NIE McGregor
and, uh, TE Much is a Maori trade advisory group
where we've put together, but, um, it's a side gig.
My day job is, I'm a chairman of a Maori corporation
and, uh, we're at the top of South Island,
but we export to 32 countries around the world.
And so, um, we're quite involved in sort of, uh,
these different markets and, uh, sit on,
but also Federation Maori Authority, which is a federation
of the places like WTO Corporation now.
So, um, and this idea of, um, you know, the impact
of non tariff barriers on the Maori economy
is absolutely significant to us, um,
because it's part of the bigger picture as well.
It's about Maori's export contributions,
the overall New Zealand economy.
And I think, you know, if you think
of it couched in those sorts of terms, looking at,
at things like the, um, aspiration of doubling the value
of exports in 10 years, this has
to be a fundamental platform for it.
Maori are quite, uh, we predominate in the, uh,
export industries in the primary industries,
and I noticed many of the, uh,
committee members have experienced in
that primary industries, either as a background to it
or, um, some official capacity.
So, you know, and understand things that, um,
hit us Maori are in seafood, forestry, food
and beverage, sheep and beef.
Um, but the unique thing about Maori is that we're in most
of those at the same time,
because many of our own corporations like our,
we're in aquaculture and we're in horticulture,
we're in viticulture, uh,
we're in advanced manufacturing products and stuff.
We carry all of those in basically our portfolio,
either our assets, investments or our operations.
So, uh, that's an important point.
So that means we are many times affected by tariffs
and then also non tariff barriers,
which actually has a cumulative effect on us,
and that's why it's really important
for us at this really uncertain time in this global, um,
trade environment context for us to get some
of these things right.
At the risk of using my own time to support the,
the previous guy, um, van, I mean, he's the guy
that knows everything about it, but you know
that A-C-C-T-S mm-hmm.
What a great idea. It is an open PLU lateral actually is
where outside or New Zealand is
leading the world in these things.
And as we look at the new trade environment, these sorts
of agreements are going to be the sorts of things that kind
of can support us and show us up.
So absolutely support that copa.
Um, I did a little printout for you guys,
so you can follow me if you like.
Yeah, thank you. Got that. It's, it's a bit analog,
but you've got the digital version as well,
so you can refer back to that.
Just had this, um, we're on the Maori AG
export contribution page, right.
And, um, I just thought, I thought that there,
because we look at
where Maori predominate given the significant ownership, uh,
states that Maori have in these sectors,
we actually make a significant contribution to this.
And I thought I'd just put that in, you know, seafood, 50%
of the 2.1 billion Maori, uh, forestry, 40%
of the 6.6 billion, and these are export earnings per year.
Maori sheep and beef, 30% of the 12 billion dairy, 10%
of the 26 billion horticulture, 10% of 6.9 billion.
When you add that all up, that's about $10 billion
of export earnings that is coming
through from the Maori economy.
And we have an estimate around this one for exporting, uh,
earnings that the impact
of non tariff barriers on us could be as much as 10 to 15,
potentially 20% in some sectors.
So you think of 10 to 20% of $10 billion,
every billion dollar counts, right?
So, um, it's an important thing for us.
And then I noticed that NPI just put their, um,
export earnings, uh, paper out today
and, you know, this is about 53 billion.
They're going towards, I see 56 billion heading up
to 58 billion.
So that's pretty important
because that's basically 10% of, um, ALT's GT GDP,
and it's about 12%
of the workforce are engaged in these sectors
and we're part of it.
Um, TBS key TBS for Maori exporters.
I've just listed five bullet points here around stuff,
and I can go through that and then I can maybe do a deeper
dive if you wanna know about that stuff.
But, you know, you've heard these things before.
Sanitary and phyto sanitary standards,
the strictness around those things.
Um, we face disproportionate challenges with complex
and time consuming SPS standards for Maori example for,
for horticulture fresh produce like,
and avocados require really stringent inspections causing
delays that actually reduce the freshness of the product and
therefore reduce the value that we get in the market.
These are real and fisheries Maori expertise, uh,
ex enterprises that export things like power
and KA one, I have to comply with these really, um,
extensive handling protocols, uh, which again,
escalate the costs and therefore create an efficiencies
and reduce the value that we get in those markets.
The solution for us really is just ensuring
that we get greater advocacy, more harmonization on these,
uh, risk-based spss, uh, in these international markets
for us, taking's science based approaches
and using that to extend that into timely
and fair treatment of Maori products,
I think is a really good solution.
The second bullet point around NTVs sustainability and,
and certification misalignment.
Um, global certification systems actually really fail
to recognize or even align with, uh, teang Maori practices,
particularly around things like Katana,
Maori forestry businesses, uh, face a significant cost
to really comply with these international sustainability
standards, but they undervalue the indigenous environmental
stewardship that actually comes along
and is inherent in these products with us.
Similar challenges are faced by Maori fisheries, um,
and the organic horticulture exporters
who operate sustainably,
but they actually struggle with these certifications
that don't take account these traditional methods.
Hmm. The solution that we are thinking
around this is just embedding the recognition
of indigenous sustainability practices
into our free trade groups.
And we can see we, we just getting in, in there now in terms
of some of the, uh, recent, uh, FTAs
and SERS around these global, uh, certifications
would better support Maori exporters
and acknowledge, you know, that unique contribution
to environment and the environmental protection inherent in
that one third bullet point, access barriers for value added
and indigenous products, um, TBS make it harder
for Maori exporters to actually move up the value chain.
Maori forestry businesses often are restricted from
exporting finished
or semi-pro timber products due to protectionist rules.
Um, Maori traditional medicines like our mm-hmm.
Or indigenous products like tea for instance. Mm-hmm.
Um, they actually face significant hurdles due
to regulatory frameworks
that actually just, there's a mismatch there.
They're all suited to indigenous knowledge systems.
So the solution for that is really having trade policies
that actively promote these, uh, value added exports
by reducing these access barriers and, um,
and in that having that recognition of indigenous products
and that's through mechanisms that you've already started
to develop in place like the Maori economic, uh,
cooperation, uh,
chapters in the recent free trade agreements like uk, eu,
uh, I understand CPR and GCC.
So, um, fourth one is market discrimination input quotas.
You're probably really familiar with that,
but, um, actually Maori exporters are actually
disproportionately impacted by quotas, subsidies,
and protectionist policies.
Because of the nature of our asset portfolio
and our exports products like, um, to timber power,
Manuka derived goods are particularly affected.
Um, and that makes Maori businesses struggle
to compete really against these, you know, subsidized, uh,
competitors in these overseas markets.
Our solution around that one is Maori exporters require
trade agreements to really ensure
that they include really much stronger protections against
that market discrimination and subsidies
and have a focus around equitable access, uh, particularly
around the quota allocations.
The last bullet point in that one is around cultural
and branding restrictions, which is a weird one,
but it, it's a really has a significant impact.
Um, often might exporters
actually are restricted from showcasing
our cultural identity.
Labeling is a big thing. We actually had one, uh, incident.
We had, uh, 10 million units being shipped off
to a big American replicant save out Joes.
And um, when we had it came back
and uh, we had to relabel 10 million units around things
because of that sudden change around those requirements.
Those are expenses, the margin is gone, you know,
and make your requirements for your exporters.
But you know, it can prevent us using indigenous names,
symbols, or narratives in our branding.
It dilutes our competitive veg, uh,
which comes from the authenticity
and the connection to Al Maori and that one.
So trade agreements must explicitly project, uh,
this is our solutions around this, our suggestion.
These agreements explicitly protect cultural branding rights
and create pathways for these Maori exporters
to promote their, um, identity
in markets that are global.
Indigenous intellectual property protections should be
strengthened to safeguard Maoris on an international trade.
I could, am I running outta time?
I was gonna do a couple of deep
dives so that we don't much time.
Let me just go to some, I'll do too deep diced
because I think they're important and
they'll go through some recommendations.
Is that all right? Yeah.
So we've, we've got a couple
of minutes left, but okay, cool.
I think I've covered the main questions. This one, right?
Yeah. So cool. Um, you know, seafood sector, you know,
again, it's these uh, sanitary and phyto measures
and it's these really, um, prolonged, you know, uh,
testing requirements for the contaminants and and pathogens.
But even when we've actually met all the New Zealand
requirements in these places, these delays
actually cause you know, costs for shipping and uh, product
and market, um, custom delays, fresh seafood shipments,
face coffin delays are customs reducing shelf life,
which is again a thing for productivity
and pro profitability rather.
Um, and we want to take a holistic approach to
how they understand our business
and natures the sustainability practices
that we have in place like our tta, tta, COPA
and cultural harvest, you know, um, what kui means
for us in terms of what, how we affect that
around biomass conservation, those things.
Got some stuff in forestry,
but I'm gonna go straight to, oh beverages.
Beverages is a good one. Um, have you guys heard the
to wines world class first Maori wine in the world.
Great, thank you. Enjoy wines. Yes.
Too much possibly too much possibly.
I'm just saying great Christmas gift
and I can give you pretty important,
Right.
Sustainability certifications.
Premium products like wine often require certifications
like organic or feed trade,
but yet many importing countries impose additional criteria
unrelated to market value.
And then I'll just say to um, beefing lamb
because these guys, we have fish fair interest in it.
Put out a report that you guys are probably well familiar
with around TBS
and it's likely impact $1.5 billion
is what they estimate on that.
If we take crude approach to this
and figures 30% of that in terms of is Maori economy
and that that's $450 million, if we don't get some
of these things right around things like shelf life
restrictions, we can see some non-scientific shelf life
restrictions in places like, uh,
into the Middle East market.
That means that we actually have, um,
restrictions on little shelf life of chilled meat
that increases waste and costs.
And then just to some recommendations have
that reports pretty good in terms of the recommendations
for us, it's just pulling all those things together
and so basically streamline testing
and certification requirements.
I think we should be advocating for, you know,
the mutual recognition arrangements with all
of these key trading partners.
So we do it right in our country. They should recognize
here the PS ps.
Um, I think
the government should invest in Maori export facilitation
and that's um, access to funding to support Maori and,
and by of that non Maori, um, exporters in terms
of navigating these TBS and having grants.
One way of doing that is supporting groups like our group
Tata, which costs less than 0.0125 of a percent
in terms of what we might lose in non barriers.
I put that figure this morning on the phone,
but it's true to do that continue to support us
because what has to happen is MFA MPI
and MB have to get out into the regions and get in
and understand Maori businesses,
export businesses in those places.
They did a couple of events where seven people turned up,
we did one and it was 360 people turn up
and Maori talked to Maori.
We get more out of it and um,
and that's basically, you know,
our recommendations around this one.
Couldn't agree more. Excellent. Thank you very much.
Appreciate your submission. Um, Brian Hamilton.
Oh, thank you. Just a quick question you mentioned
and your beef, um, sustainable slide there.
Um, cultural sustainability values overlooked.
Can you give an example of what that be
and how we could actually overcome that?
Yeah, one of the important things for us is, is as Maori,
you know, many, uh, particularly the ones that were a part
of the treaty settlement process have taken over businesses
that were operating businesses.
They had, uh, previous operating models,
which include the way that they, um, did their, particularly
around their farming practices.
They're going through transitions that requires capital
for them to do that one, you know, understanding of
where we are in that transition process is pretty important
and being able to communicate that to the market
and say, take a holistic approach, look at what we have,
what we do in terms of our farming practices, the things
that the transition of the Maori economy to a much more, uh,
circular, sustainable economy are the messages
that we wanna get out into market,
but particularly to consumers.
So they can be the discriminators
for putting those in in particularly, you know,
things like, um, sheep and beef.
They've done a great report on this one.
Um, be if fellows had a chance to read it,
but you know, it really explains a lot of the things
that are happening as a process and where we are heading to,
but also where we are now in
getting those recognized in the market.
Okay. Sorry, final question Damien.
Look, Thank you. I mean the TBS there, uh, many
of them protect the unique aspect to your, um, market,
your products and I guess that that, um, you know,
the market discrimination portfolio is clearly, again, you
stringent standards, all of those things protect you
arguably is it, um, more productive to work on a way
of differentiating and protecting rather than pushing back?
Because most of those markets are very, very competitive
and point of differences is the key to your success.
Yeah, it is. And so, uh, to do that we actually have
to have the mechanism in place to acknowledge, uh,
intellectual property rights in these markets
and understanding of the Maori,
the discriminator for us in those markets.
Part of that is our relationship with Tyo
and how we can communicate
that both from a story perspective
but also from the regulatory processes that we have here.
We have a challenge in Alor around NPIs definition
around honey and manuka honey
and one of those things, those, those things
where we're not clear on it, they translate
and they exacerbate when we get out to the market.
So it's having those alignments
and harmonizations, I think
that's the key message you wanna leave with it,
plus also fund us, you know, us other than that,
get those harmonizations in in place
because it's enough for us to go teeny tiny country.
Going out to all of these countries in the world
and having to go and do different things
for different key markets is pretty important.
Very good. Alright, thank you very much for your insight.
Happy Christmas probably wine honey.
Thank
That. Ends our public session.
Uh, just a couple of quick.